
					~ The Desrosiers Mechanics Teaching Tool ~
					
					
	
	Created and Developed By Gregory Desrosiers
	
	Start Date: Friday, February 21st, 2014
	End Date: Tuesday, May 13th, 2014
	
	Project Start Date: Tuesday, January 21st, 2014
	Project End Date: Tuesday, May 20th, 2014
	
	Produced in association with Champlain Regional College - Saint-Lambert Campus
	Integrative Project in Computer Science and Mathematics (420-204-RE)
	
	Development Support: 
	William Leclerc, Simon Cochrane, Olivier Carrière, Sean Marcoux, Chloé Ménard
	Mugisha "Christine" Joyce Kakou, Alexandre Comeau-Vermeersch, Ege "Jason" Özer,
	Jonathan Luciux-André, Darrin Fong, Jeremy Brown, Simon Thompson, Tiémé-Frédéric Togola
	Patrick Todd, Ho Man Chan
	
	
	
	
	
	Assistants for Programmer: Marie Pupo, Emily O' Donnell
	
	Assistant Producers: Samia Ramadan, Jennifer Liutec, Robert Bierman
	
	Producer & Director: Amin Ranj Bar
	
	Senior Producer & College Program Director: Pedro Cabrejo
	
	Executive Producer: Don Shewan
	
	In Memory of Linda McGirr,
	Computer Science Department Director & Professor
	
	
	
	
	

	DISCLAIMER: This program has not been registered in the copyright database of the
	Canadian Intellectual Property Office. It is copyrighted as is only for the purpose
	that this property is owned exclusively by Gregory Desrosiers, Champlain College Saint-Lambert,
	and Champlain Regional College.

	This program is not for sale, and you do not have the right to modify the source
	code and redistribute this program.




	This program has been developed using Oracle's JAVA 1.7.0 programming language. 
	(JAVA Development Kit v1.7.0_45)

	™ & © 2014 Oracle Corporation. JAVA, the JAVA logo, and its affilates, are trademarks 
	and/or copyrighted material of Oracle. All rights reserved.

	Developed using Eclipse Kepler and NetBeans 7.3.1 IDEs. 
	Eclipse Kepler © Eclipse contributors and others 2005, 2013.  All rights reserved.

	NetBeans 7.3.1 IDE © 2013 Oracle Corporation. All rights reserved.

	© 2014 Champlain Regional College. Production © 2014 Champlain College Saint-Lambert. 
	Source Code and Project Design © 2014 Gregory Desrosiers. The Champlain Regional
	College logo, the Champlain College Saint-Lambert logo, the affilates, and the names,
	are trademarks and/or copyrighted material of their respectful owners. 
	All rights reserved.
	